# 2023

2023 is over, and I figured this is a great opportunity to look back
onto what I accomplished during that time!

### Miscellaneous

One of the biggest changes this year certainly was getting a job as a
full-stack developer in Seoul. Even though there is a long list of
things to complain about (which seems to grow by the day), I am
nevertheless glad to finally be able to do what I want to and make a
living with it. Professionally I grew a lot over the last year, and for
the better or worse, most of it can be attributed to my own eagerness
and perseverance. It still bothers me from time to time that I did not
make as much progress on computer science fundamentals as I intended to,
but actually, I think this is nothing to be too surprised about. There's
just still a lot to learn. Besides, I found quite a liking for the [Unix
philosophy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_philosophy) and Bash
scripting. This may come as a surprise to some, but learning Bash and
writing some [useful
utilities](https://github.com/mxngls/dotfiles/tree/main/shell/bin) just
for myself were particularly fun. On top of that, I came to really like
Makefiles.

The second biggest change this year - a more personal one - was without
a doubt getting married. Besides the wedding itself, the preparations
took up a big chunk of my time this year, even though my wife selflessly
did most of the work. The happier I am to report that the wedding was a
great success and lots of fun, not just for me, but for everyone
involved. Growing as a person, not just by myself, but together as a
married couple, is something I am eagerly looking forward to in the
coming years.

In terms of things that happened this year, I think mentioning starting
to work in Tech and getting married already does its justice. Still,
there are two other small lessons I learned that I want to mention
anyway. In a certain way, I already knew this before, but I realized I
do miss home more than I was ready to admit before. Speaking Korean
every day can feel exhausting from time to time. Besides getting better
at writing software, I spent a non-trivial amount of time learning to
configure and suit it to my liking. One of the most important takeaways,
though, is simply that the choice of your editor or shell doesn't matter
too much anyway. Yes, being able to edit text seamlessly with just a few
keystrokes is fun and may even be faster and more efficient, but it does
not really make me a better software engineer. What makes me a better
software engineer instead are the character traits that brought me onto
the path to learning these tools in the first place. The urge to get to
know how things work under the hood. The perseverance to stick with
things that can be uncomfortable and pretty challenging at times.
Navigating text via Vim motions and knowing some of the particulars of
ZSH's completion system less so. Of course, I already knew this before,
but I guess I had to spend some time to get to fully understand
this.[^1]

### Reading

Coming into this year, I did not really have a fixed goal in mind about
how many books I wanted to read.[^2] Due to logistical reasons, most, if
not all, of my reading this year happened on my phone. According to my
iBooks library, I read five books this year, with a sixth one not
finished yet. I read a couple of other books online as well, but I doubt
the number of books read would be much higher even if I included these. 
The most remarkable reads were "The Dream Machine" by M. Mitchell 
Waldrop and "Oceanic" by Greg Egan. I intend to spend less time online 
and a bit more time reading books in the coming year.

[^1]: Of course, tinkering with configuration files like this doesn't
    only have drawbacks. I learned quite a lot about Bash and shell
    scripting in general while diving into the ZSH manual looking to
    understand its complex completion system. I could probably come up
    with a couple more examples like this, where playful exploration of
    one thing led to a deeper understanding of another. My general point
    stands, though.

[^2]: I think this is a silly and not really helpful metric anyway. It
    seems people that went down this road came to a similar
    [conclusion](http://malloc.dog/blog/2020/04/23/reading-n-books-per-year/).
    The more different things you read, the higher the probability that
    you retain less from each of them.
