---
title: "2023"
subtitle: "Year in Review"
date:  "2023/12/31"
---

2023 is over and I figured this is a great opportunity to look back onto
what I accomplished during that time.

## Working in Tech

Thinking about all that has happened this year there are two things that
definitely stand out above anything else. The first one is me getting a
job as a full-stack web developer in Seoul. Even though there is a long
list of things to complain about (which seems to grow by the day) I am
nevertheless happy to finally be able to do what I want to and make a
living with it. I grew a lot professionally over the last year and for
the better or worse most of it can be attributed to my own eagerness and
perseverance. It still bothers me from time to time that I did not make
as much progress on computer science fundamentals as I intended to, but
actually I think this is nothing to be surprised of too much. Creating
software involves lots of what I like to call plumbing, anything that
resolves around writing and distributing software, but not the act
itself. Working in web development involves using countless technologies
that you have to know about, may it be Docker, Nginx or AWS. As someone
writing software professionally for the first time, getting to know
these simply takes some time.

Besides, I now truly feel at home using the command line and all the
different utilities that come with Unix like operating systems. This may
come to the surprise to some, but learning Bash and writing some useful
utilities for myself were particular fun. On top of that I came to
really like Makefiles. But my love for Unix and it's philosophy is
something for another time.

In addition I did improve significantly using Vim as a text editor.
Editing text with Vim's key-bindings is less about efficiency, but more
about being able to think effortlessly while editing text. It certainly
takes a significant amount of time to really absorb the numerous
shortcuts used on a day to day basis until you are able to recall them
from memory and to get to know the editors numerous idiosyncrasies, but
as I get there it feels like some kind of wall broke down I did not know
existed before when editing text and writing software in particular.

One common theme for both of these is the use of text based
configuration files. Before, configuring software and changing it's
settings via simply editing text files instead of relying on a GUI, felt
like something you had to be careful with and sometimes even afraid of.
This is of course bogus. As with everything else in (software)
engineering you just have to know what you are doing to not fuck things
up. And if that is not the case yet this is something that can simply be
changed.

## Getting Married

The second biggest change this year - a more personal one - was without
a doubt getting married. Besides the wedding itself the preparations
took up a big chunk of my time this year, even though my wife selflessly
did most of the work. The more happy I am to report that the wedding was
a great success and lots of fun, not just for me, but for all people
involved. Moving in together shortly before the wedding and now spending
every day and night by each others side still feels a bit unreal.
Growing as a person and together as a married couple is something I am
eagerly looking forward to in the coming years.

## Miscellaneous

In terms of things that happened this year I think mentioning starting
to work as a software engineer and getting married already does its
justice. Still there's a list of smaller lessons that I learned that I
want to mention anyway.

In a certain way I already knew this before, but I realized I do miss
home more than I was as ready to admit before. Though I am not sure if
this feeling is not really more coming from the cultural and
socioeconomic differences between the west and Korea and how I struggle
with these at times. Speaking Korean everyday can feel exhausting and
even though I was already aware of my shortcomings when it comes to
speaking Korean before, being reminded of them everyday does not really
help here. This may sound that my Korean is be pretty poor and barely
enough to get by everyday, but this is not really the case either. I use
Korean at work fairly comfortable, but still lack the confidence I have
when speaking Japanese. Looking back now it is obvious that simply
hoping to improve through passively picking up stuff here and there is
of course not enough.

I already talked briefly about how Vim is my editor of choice and my
fondness of Unix environments, but while getting better at writing
software while using these tools I experienced first hand how easy it is
to fall into the trap of over-engineering stuff. Especially when it
comes to configuring personal software. One of the most important things
to take away from the time spent learning these, is simply that the
choice of your editor or shell doesn't matter too much anyway. Yes,
being able to edit text seamlessly with just a few keystrokes is fun and
may even be faster and more efficient, but it does not really make me a
better software engineer. What makes me a better software engineer
instead are the character traits that brought me unto the path to
learning these tools in the first place. The urge to get to know how
things work under the hood. The perseverance to stick with things that
can be uncomfortable and pretty challenging at times. Navigating text
via Vim motions and knowing some of the particulars of ZSH's completion
system less so. Of course I already knew this before, but I guess I had
to spend - or waste - some time to get to fully understand this.[^1]

## Reading

Coming into this year I did not really have a fixed goal in mind about
how many books I wanted to read.[^2] Due to logistical reasons most, if
not all, of my reading this year happened on my phone. According to my
iBooks library I read five books this year, with a sixth one not
finished yet. I read a couple of other books online as well, but I doubt
the number of books read would be much higher even if I included these.
The most remarkable reads were "The Dream Machine" by M. Mitchel Waldrop
and "Oceanic" by Greg Egan. I mostly read books in short bursts during
which I get totally immersed in whatever topic the book I am reading
then deals with. In the time between I tend to not read too much. I
intend to spend a less time online and a bit more reading books in the
coming year though.

[^1]:   Of course tinkering with configuration files like this
        doesn't only have drawbacks. I learned quite a lot about Bash 
        and shell scripting in general while diving into the ZSH manual
        looking to understand it's complex completion system. I could 
        probably come up with a couple more examples like this, where 
        playful exploration of one thing led to a deeper understanding 
        of another. My general point stands though.

[^2]:   I think this is a silly and not really helpful metric anyway. It
        seems people that went down this road to came to similar
        [conclusion](http://malloc.dog/blog/2020/04/23/reading-n-books-per-year/).
        The more different things you read the higher the probability that
        you retain less from each of them.
