---
title: "This websites reason d'être"
subtitle: "Remising about my motivations to create this website"
date: "2023/11/19"
---

### Exposing yourself

As the discerning reader may have already noticed while skimming the
'About' page, I took considerable time contemplating the decision to
create and share this website. Not because its development is
particularly difficult, but rather due to my apprehension about exposing
myself like this.

When meeting people face-to-face, I am quite outgoing, even when meeting
them for the first time.  However, this extroverted demeanor doesn't
seamlessly translate to my online presence.  I have never been one to
feel compelled to share much of myself with others online.  This was
true during middle school when everyone spent their evenings chatting
via ICQ, and it still holds true today.  For instance, I used Twitter
for years, primarily lurking and reading other people's tweets, before
making a conscious effort to start tweeting myself, even though I
enjoyed being on Twitter.  The issue — as I have to admit, somewhat
embarrassingly — simply boiled down to me lacking the confidence to
share information about myself in a way that would make it available for
everyone at all times.  For some reason, I was afraid of how people
online, especially those I looked up to professionally, would perceive
me.  In retrospect, these worries were somewhat silly and proved to be
totally unfounded.  I started tweeting occasionally about a year ago,
and, to no surprise, my presence went largely unnoticed.  I expect the
same for sharing my work and thoughts online.

### Why I write

Having addressed past reservations about why I refrained from sharing
more of myself online, the question, what exactly motivates me to do so
now, remains. This second question proved to be more challenging than I
thought at first. I believe the reason is somewhat twofold and, in many
ways, resembles what Julia Evans highlighted as the [primary
motivations](https://jvns.ca/blog/brag-documents/) behind her year-long
blogging activity.

First, I am convinced that putting your thoughts in writing forces you
to clarify and organize them in a way that perhaps only conversations
with other people do. In the process, I often find myself realizing that
something I previously believed I had a solid understanding of was, in
fact, not as clear to me as I initially thought. This applies as much to
academic as to personal reflections. Thus, I hope that writing about
interesting technicalities in particular will help me become a better
software engineer, and that writing about everything else will help me
gain a better understanding of myself and the world around me.

Second, I write to get to know interesting people. I have already made
acquaintances living on the other side of the world just by reaching out
to them via Twitter. I sincerely hope the same holds true for publishing
my writing on here.
